Independent Study Proposal on "Types and Programming Languages"
===============================================================

During my final semester at Penn, I want to study Benjamin C. Pierce's
textbook Types and Programming Languages in the frame of an
independent study. The theory of programming languages, type systems
and functional programming are the topics that have excited me most
throughout my Master's degree here at Penn. In fact, my fascination
for functional programming and programming languages theory were the
main reasons for applying to the University of Pennsylvania and its
renown programming languages group in the first place.

By studying Pierce's book Types and Programming languages I expect to
profoundly deepen my understanding of programming languages theory and
to put it on solid theoretic grounds. I believe the so acquired firm
understanding of the foundations of functional programming and type
theory to be very beneficial in several regards. First, they will
ideally complement my past studies in Software Foundations, Advanced
Programming in Haskell, and Programming Paradigms by giving me
another, purely theoretic perspective on programming. Second, I expect
the knowledge from Types and Programming Languages to make me a better
programmer in the future by better leveraging a program's type system
to enforce correctness properties. Finally, I think that through the
study of Pierce's book I'll become more apt for understanding the
advanced type-theoretic concepts that are increasingly being
introduced in new functional libraries such as Lenses, Pipes, etc.

I plan to align my independent study closely with the sample syllabus
as outlined for an advanced graduate course on page xix, figure P-2 of
the book. To this end, I plan to read the syllabus' corresponding
chapters on a weekly basis.

Additionally, while reading a chapter, I plan to solve the as
"recommended" marked exercises in addition to all "quick check"
exercises. According to Prof. Pierce these exercises
correspond roughly to a weekly homework assignment sized problem
set. I plan to typeset and submit my solutions to the book's exercises
to Prof. Pierce for evaluation and feedback. As part of the feedback
and to discuss and clarify questions on the material on my part,
meetings with Prof. Pierce are planned every three weeks.

Finally, upon finishing the book Types and Programming Languages I
want to write a report about this independent study, my achievements,
and the lessons learned.
